---
layout: post
title: I Thought It Would Be Easy
---
So, I started this new coding bootcamp to jump start my carreer.  I figured, "Hey, I have 20 years of coding experience, this should be easy."  From my memory of taking various programming language classes in college, it was all a matter of learning the different syntax of each language, but they all used the same operators and loops.  They all had a way to define a procedure or function.  And objects or classes, where simply a set of of procedures, function, and properties that make up a particular object and can be inherited by another, making the need for repeating coding less of an issue.  Turns out, I was wrong.

I spent the last 20 years as a MS VB/SQL programmer.  My company uses Micosoft's Visual Studio [IDE - integrated development environment] for all of their projects.  It was nice that all of the guess work was taken away from me.  The IDE took care of telling me when the syntax was wrong, as I was coding.  It would suggest (or auto-complete) my code as I was typing.  Looking up built-in commands, procedures, function, types, etc. was an easy search feature.  And, in most cases, I could just start typing what I think might be the coding I needed, and it would pop-up for me.  Designing my user interface was a matter of selecting an object type (such as a text field from the toolbox) and dragging-and-dropping onto the screen.  I can use the mouse to move it and resize it, as needed.  Debugging code was just as easy.  If there was an error on compile, the IDE would take me to the exact line of of code and highlight it for me.  I can edit it and re-compile.  If there is an error on execution, the debugger would stop on the offending line of code.  If that particular line wasn't the actual cause of the problem, I can open the call stack and click back through the code until I was able to find offending problem.  Life was easy.

When I started my first Ruby project for this bootcamp, I was like, "Where's the IDE?"  My new IDE was a text editor.  **Wait, what?**  I had to open up Ruby Documentation to find every single keyword and syntax.  I had to look up countless sample programs to find out how to use various commands, because I often had no idea which section I was supposed to be in or whether the particular piece of code I wanted to use even applied to my program.  *I felt like a complete novice.*  It turns out, *I am a novice*.  Now, I have to write lines of code and execute.  If it crashes, I need to decifer the cryptic messages on the screen to figure out where in my code could the problem be.  Now, it was an iterative process of figuring out what went wrong.  (NOTE: to be fair, there are apparently IDEs out there for Ruby/Rails, but those are expensive.  I forget that in my current job, my company had to purchase the MS VS IDE.  Also, with experience, you do start to figure out what those cryptic messages mean.)

I realized, that as a VB programmer, I never had to build a complete application from scratch.  We always had a base application that we started with.  We had ready-built templates for file maintenances, transaction postings, reports, and interfaces.  You just had to drag-and-drop boxes here or there and you were done.  Life was made easy for me at work.  As a new Ruby/Rails developer, I'm suddenly learning how to build a complete web application.  This was an extremely challenging task.  But.., it was worth it.

Learning how to write every line of code within a text editor was a challenge, but it taught me so much more in a fews weeks of development, than I learned in the last 20 years.  (Well, not really, but almost.)  The learning process was different.  I had to use quite a few more resources to find answers to my problems.  Of course, I had my mentor and input from other students, but I started to learn how to use online resources such as coding forums and online code repositories and documentation.  Google searches also played a hugh roll in development.  Essentially, all of my resources were different.

I have a lot to learn still.  I've years ahead of me before I can call myself an expert.  But, I think I'm on the right track now..., for once.